# Spelling and pronunciation

Pandunia is phonetic in two directions:

1. When you read a word, you can always pronounce it.
2. When you hear a word, you can almost always write it.
   (Foreign names can be an exception.)

Once you have learned the few rules and the way letters are pronounced,
you can read Pandunia aloud and be understood.

## Basic Latin Alphabet

Pandunia is written in the Latin alphabet – the same as English!
It has one special letter, *ə*, but it can be substituted with *y*.
So Pandunia can be typed, printed and used with computers and smart devices in most countries without any difficulty.

> a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p r s t u v x ə/y z

## Sounds

Pandunia has its own sound system and its own spelling system
that are mostly similar to those of the languages of continental Europe and Latin America.

The complete speech sound inventory of Pandunia is presented in the table below.

|                    | Labial | Alveolar | Palatal | Velar   | Glottal |
|:-------------------|:-------:|:-------:|:-------:|:-------:|:-------:|
| **Stops**          | b p     | t d     | c       | k g     |         |
| **Fricatives**     | f       | s z     |         |         | h       |
| **Nasals**         | m       | n       |         | (ng)    |         |
| **Lateral**        |         | l       |         |         |         |
| **Trill**          |         | r       |         |         |         |
| **Semivowels**     | v       |         | j       |         |         |
| **High vowels**    | u       |         | i       |         |         |
| **Mid vowels**     | o       | ə       | e       |         |         |
| **Low vowels**     |         | a       |         |         |         |
|                    |**Back**|**Central**|**Front**|        |         |


### Vowels

Pandunia has six oral vowels.
They are represented by the six vowel letters a, e, i, o, u, and ə or y in the writing system.

The table below shows how each Pandunia vowel is pronounced
by using the symbols of the Internation Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)
as well as pronunciation advice in plain English.

| Pandunia | IPA    | Pronunciation advice |
|:--------:|:------:|:---------------------|
| a        | a      | As in _father_. |
| e        | e      | As in _bet_. |
| i        | i      | As in _machine_. |
| o        | o      | As in _or_. |
| u        | u      | As in _rule_. |
| ə or y   | ə      | As the _a_ in _about_. |

There are also several common vowel sequences
– au, eu, ou, ai, ei, oi –
which are pronounced as the consecutive vowels with or without a hiatus in between.


### Semivowels

A semivowel is a sound that is phonetically similar to a vowel sound but functions like a consonant as the syllable boundary.
Pandunia has two semivowels **j** and **v**.
They appear only in the beginning of a syllable
and they are always followed by a full vowel.


### Consonants

Pandunia has 19 consonant sounds.
They are represented in the writing system by 19 Latin letters and their combinations.
Most of them are pronounced in roughly the same way as in English.

The table below shows how each Pandunia consonant is pronounced
by using the symbols of the Internation Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)
as well as pronunciation advise in plain English.
If an alternative pronunciation is allowed,
it is enclosed in parentheses in the IPA column.

| Pandunia | IPA    | Pronunciation advise |
|:--------:|:------:|:---------------------|
| b        | b      | |
| c        | tʃ (ts)| Like _ch_ in _chip_. |
| d        | d      | |
| f        | f      | |
| g        | g      | Always hard as in _get_. Never soft as in _gel_. |
| h        | h (x)  | |
| j        | j      | Like _y_ in _yes_. |
| k        | kʰ     | Pronounced with a puff of air as in _kin_. |
| l        | l      | |
| m        | m      | |
| n        | n (ŋ)  | |
| p        | pʰ     | Pronounced with a puff of air as in _pin_. |
| r        | r (ɹ)  | Preferably trilled as in Scottish and Indian English, or smooth as in American English. Never silent! |
| s        | s      | Always voiceless like _s_ in _sissy_. |
| t        | tʰ     | Pronounced with a puff of air as in _tin_. |
| v        | w (v)  | |
| x        | ks (s) | |
| z        | z (ʒ)  | As _z_ in _zoo_ or _azure_ |


## Stress accent

1. If the word has one or two syllables, the first syllable is accented.
2. If the word has three or more syllables, the second syllable is accented.
3. Syllables that include the vowel **ə** are not counted in, and they are never accented.


## External letters and sounds

There are also additional letters and letter-combinations, which can be used only in _external words_,
which do not belong to the ordinary vocabulary of Pandunia, like names of individual places and people.
They are not used in any common Pandunia words.

| Pandunia | IPA    | Pronunciation advise |
|:--------:|:------:|:---------------------|
| Ch       | tʃ     | Always like _ch_ in _chat_. |
| Kh       | x      | Voiceless velar fricative, like _ch_ in _Loch_ in Scottish. |
| Gh       | ɣ      | Voiced velar fricative |
| Ph       | ɸ      | Voiceless bilabial fricative |
| Bh       | β      | Voiced bilabial fricative |
| Q        | q      | Voiceless uvular stop |
| Qh       | χ      | Voiceless uvular fricative |
| Rh       | ʀ~ʁ    | Voiced uvular trill or fricative like _rh_ in _rhume_ in Parisian French. |
| Th       | θ      | Like _th_ in _thing_. |
| Dh       | ð      | Like _th_ in _they_. |
| Sh       | ʃ      | Like _sh_ in _shop_. |
| Zh       | ʒ      | Like _z_ in _azure_. |
| W        | w (v)  | |
| X        | ks (s) | Like _x_ in _axe_. |

The additional letters and digraphs are used locally.
Their purpose is to help to transfer names in the local language to the international language,
so that the local people can recognize them.
It's OK if you don't know how to pronounce any of these sounds.
The letters C, Q, W, and X can be prounced the same as S, K, V, and KS,
and the others can all be pronunced as if the H is not there.

For example, the capital of Greece is called "Αθήνα" /aθina/ in the local language, Greek.
The Pandunia version of this name is "Athina".
It can be pronounced either /aθina/ (as the Greek do) or /atina/ (in the simplified international accent).

Examples:  
**Athina** Athens (the capital of Greece)  
**Khartum** Khartoum (the capital of Sudan)  
**Rhone** Rhône (a river in France and Switzerland)  

## Word Structure

Pandunia words are structurally rather simple.
A syllable can include in maximum:

- one initial consonant
- one liquid consonant (**l** or **r**)
- one or two vowels, and
- one final consonant from the following:
  **m**, **n**, **ng**, **l**, **r**, **f**, **s**, **h**.

Certain consonant clusters are also allowed only between vowels, like **zn**.

Some of the heaviest words in practice are **problem** and **simple**.


## Adapting Loan Words

As a general rule, loan words are adapted to the phonetic spelling system of Pandunia.
This rule is applied to both common words and proper names.

### Common words

A common word refers to a thing as a member of a group, not as an individual.
For example _dog_ is a common word but _Sam_ is not, it is a proper name.

Common words, which are in general use, must fit into the normal word structure,
and they can include only the normal sounds of Pandunia.

Most Pandunia words are structurally simpler than the corresponding English words.
Difficult consonant groups are avoided in the beginning, middle and end of words,
so _stadium_ is **estadia**, _act_ is **ate**, and _saint_ is **sante** in Pandunia.
Also final stop consonants are avoided, so for example _soup_ is **supe** in Pandunia.


### Proper names

Infrequently used common nouns and proper nouns can be more complex than ordinary words.
They can even include sounds that don't belong to the normal sound inventory of Pandunia.

For example, family name _Smith_ may remain **Smith** in Pandunia,
although it is structurally more complex than common Pandunia words,
and it has the external _th_ sound.
However, foreign people probably will pronounce this name incorrectly.
Therefore it is advisable to adapt also proper names to the phonetic system of Pandunia.


## Large and Small Letters

Pandunia is normally written only in small letters (i.e. lower case letters).
Large letters are used only in special cases.

There are three reasons why large letters and rules about their usage are not necessary.

1. Writing represents speech and there are no "capital letters" in speech.
   Still understanding spoken words is as easy as understanding written words.
2. Most of the scripts and alphabets of the world have only one letter type,
   i.e. they don't have separate large and small letters.
3. It is simpler to use only small letters.
   No need for special rules for capitalization.

Note! It's not a mistake to use the capital letters.
Sometimes people do it because they are accustomed to them in other languages.
But still capital letters are unnecessary and not recommended in Pandunia.

Capital letters are necessary in standard international acronyms.
For example: 10 Mb (des megabite),
100 GB (sento gigabaite),
2 mm (du milimitre),
1 kJ (un kilojul).

#### Proper names

Personal names and other proper names can be capitalized although it's not necessary or recommended.
For example _Thomas Stearns Eliot_ would be written **Tomas Sternz Eliot** in Pandunia,
and it can be abbreviated to initial letters variously
**Tomas S Eliot**, **TS Eliot** and **TSE**.

In titles of artistic works, like books, songs and films, every word begins with a large letter.
For example,
**Putong Loga Da Insan Haki**
(The Universal Declaration of Human Rights).

#### Acronyms

Initialisms, like **ASEAN**, **EU**, **NAFTA** and **UN**, are always written in large letters.
Other acronyms may use a mixture of large and small letters,
like for example **GULag**, which is an acronym of the Russian words "Glavnoye Upravleniye Lagerey".

Capital letters are also used in the standard international acronyms.
For example:
10 Mb (des megabite),
100 GB (sento gigabaite),
2 mm (du milimitre),
1 kJ (un kilojul).


## Syllabification

« - » Words may be divided into syllables with a hyphen.
The hyphen is placed between spoken syllables. For example:
**bus**, **ka-fe**, **hu-mor**, **pos-ta**, **hi-drar-gen-te**.


## Punctuation

« . » All kinds of sentences may end with a full stop.

« ? » Questions may end alternatively with a question mark.

« ! » Exclamation mark indicates loudness or emphasis.

« ... » Three dots (i.e. ellipsis) indicates incompleteness or uncertainty.

« : » Colon indicates the beginning of an explanation, quotation or list.

« , » Comma indicates a small pause or separation between clauses or listed items.

Tip!
Because the first word of sentences is not capitalized,
two spaces can be inserted _after_ the punctuation mark
that ends the sentence.
This practice helps to separate sentences more clearly.

In informal texts, smileys, emoticons and emojis may be used to indicate mood.
For example **:)** indicates happiness and **:(** indicates sadness.

**me vidə te :)**
= I see you.  
**te no vidə me :(**
= You don't see me.

